
1
     
THE ADVENTURES OF TOM BOMBADIL
     
     
     Old Tom Bombadil was a merry fellow;
     bright blue his jacket was and his boots were yellow,
     green were his girdle and his breeches all of leather;
     he wore in his tall hat a swanwing feather.
     He lived up under Hill, where the Withywindle
     ran from a grassy well down into the dingle.
     
     Old Tom in summertime walked about the meadows
     gathering the buttercups, running after shadows,
     tickling the bumblebees that buzzed among the flowers,
     sitting by the waterside for hours upon hours.
     
     There his beard dangled long down into the water:
     up came Goldberry, the Riverwoman's daughter;
     pulled Tom's hanging hair. In he went awallowing
     under the waterlilies, bubbling and aswallowing.
     
     'Hey, Tom Bombadil! Whither are you going?'
     said fair Goldberry. 'Bubbles you are blowing,
     frightening the finny fish and the brown waterrat,
     startling the dabchicks, and drowning your featherhat!'
     
     'You bring it back again, there's a pretty maiden!'
     said Tom Bombadil. 'I do not care for wading.
     Go down! Sleep again where the pools are shady
     far below willowroots, little waterlady!'
     
     Back to her mother's house in the deepest hollow
     swam young Goldberry. But Tom, he would not follow;
     on knotted willowroots he sat in sunny weather,
     drying his yellow boots and his draggled feather.
     
     Up woke Willowman, began upon his singing,
     sang Tom fast asleep under branches swinging;
     in a crack caught him tight: snick! it closed together,
     trapped Tom Bombadil, coat and hat and feather.
     
     'Ha, Tom Bombadil! What be you athinking,
     peeping inside my tree, watching me adrinking
     deep in my wooden house, tickling me with feather,
     dripping wet down my face like a rainy weather?'
     
     'You let me out again, Old Man Willow!
     I am stiff lying here; they're no sort of pillow,
     your hard crooked roots. Drink your riverwater!
     Go back to sleep again like the Riverdaughter!'
     
     Willowman let him loose when he heard him speaking;
     locked fast his wooden house, muttering and creaking,
     whispering inside the tree. Out from willowdingle
     Tom went walking on up the Withywindle.
     
     Under the foresteaves he sat a while alistening:
     on the boughs piping birds were chirruping and whistling.
     Butterflies about his head went quivering and winking,
     until grey clouds came up, as the sun was sinking.
     
     Then Tom hurried on. Rain began to shiver,
     round rings spattering in the running river;
     a wind blew, shaken leaves chilly drops were dripping;
     into a sheltering hole Old Tom went skipping.
     
     Out came Badgerbrock with his snowy forehead
     and his dark blinking eyes. In the hill he quarried
     with his wife and many sons. By the coat they caught him,
     pulled him inside their earth, down their tunnels brought him.
     
     Inside their secret house, there they sat amumbling:
     'Ho, Tom Bombadil' Where have you come tumbling,
     bursting in the frontdoor? Badgerfolk have caught you.
     You'll never find it out, the way that we have brought you!'
     
     'Now, old Badgerbrock, do you hear me talking?
     You show me out at once! I must be awalking.
     Show me to your backdoor under briarroses;
     then clean grimy paws, wipe your earthy noses!
     Go back to sleep again on your straw pillow,
     like fair Goldberry and Old Man Willow!'
     
     Then all the Badgerfolk said: 'We beg your pardon!'
     They showed Tom out again to their thorny garden,
     went back and hid themselves, ashivering and ashaking,
     blocked up all their doors, earth together raking.
     
     Rain had passed. The sky was clear, and in the summergloaming
     Old Tom Bombadil laughed as he came homing,
     unlocked his door again, and opened up a shutter.
     In the kitchen round the lamp moths began to flutter:
     Tom through the window saw waking stars come winking,
     and the new slender moon early westward sinking.
     
     Dark came under Hill. Tom, he lit a candle;
     upstairs creaking went, turned the doorhandle.
     'Hoo, Tom Bombadil! Look what night has brought you!
     I'm here behind the door. Now at last I've caught you!
     You'd forgotten Barrowwight dwelling in the old mound
     up there on hilltop with the ring of stones round.
     He's got loose again. Under earth he'll take you.
     Poor Tom Bombadil, pale and cold he'll make you!'
     
     'Go out! Shut the door, and never come back after!
     Take away gleaming eyes, take your hollow laughter!
     Go back to grassy mound, on your stony pillow
     lay down your bony head, like Old Man Willow,
     like young Goldberry, and Badgerfolk in burrow!
     Go back to buried gold and forgotten sorrow!'
     
     Out fled Barrowwight through the window leaping,
     through the yard, over wall like a shadow sweeping,
     up hill wailing went back to leaning stonerings,
     back under lonely mound, rattling his bonerings.
     
     Old Tom Bombadil lay upon his pillow
     sweeter than Goldberry, quieter than the Willow,
     snugger than the Badgerfolk or the Barrowdwellers;
     slept like a hummingtop, snored like a bellows.
     
     He woke in morninglight, whistled like a starling,
     sang, 'Come, derrydol, merrydol, my darling!'
     He clapped on his battered hat, boots, and coat and feather;
     opened the window wide to the sunny weather.
     
     Wise old Bombadil, he was a wary fellow;
     bright blue his jacket was, and his boots were yellow.
     None ever caught old Tom in upland or in dingle,
     walking the forestpaths, or by the Withywindle,
     or out on the lilypools in boat upon the water.
     But one day Tom, he went and caught the Riverdaughter,
     in green gown, flowing hair, sitting in the rushes,
     singing old watersongs to birds upon the bushes.
     
     He caught her, held her fast! Waterrats went scuttering
     reeds hissed, herons cried, and her heart was fluttering.
     Said Tom Bombadil: 'Here's my pretty maiden!
     You shall come home with me! The table is all laden:
     yellow cream, honeycomb, white bread and butter;
     roses at the windowsill and peeping round the shutter.
     You shall come under Hill! Never mind your mother
     in her deep weedy pool: there you'll find no lover!'
     
     Old Tom Bombadil had a merry wedding,
     crowned all with buttercups, hat and feather shedding;
     his bride with forgetmenots and flaglilies for garland
     was robed all in silvergreen. He sang like a starling,
     hummed like a honeybee, lilted to the fiddle,
     clasping his rivermaid round her slender middle.
     
     Lamps gleamed within his house, and white was the bedding;
     in the bright honeymoon Badgerfolk came treading,
     danced down under Hill, and Old Man Willow
     tapped, tapped at windowpane, as they slept on the pillow,
     on the bank in the reeds Riverwoman sighing
     heard old Barrowwight in his mound crying.
     
     Old Tom Bombadil heeded not the voices,
     taps, knocks, dancing feet, all the nightly noises;
     slept till the sun arose, then sang like a starling:
     'Hey! Come derrydol, merrydol, my darling!'
     sitting on the doorstep chopping sticks of willow,
     while fair Goldberry combed her tresses yellow.
     
     
     
2
     
BOMBADIL GOES BOATING
     
     
     The old year was turning brown; the West Wind was calling;
     Tom caught a beechen leaf in the Forest falling.
     'I've caught a happy day blown me by the breezes!
     Why wait till morrowyear? I'll take it when me pleases.
     This day I'll mend my boat and journey as it chances
     west down the withystream, following my fancies!'
     
     Little Bird sat on twig. 'Whillo, Tom! I heed you.
     I've a guess, I've a guess where your fancies lead you.
     Shall I go, shall I go, bring him word to meet you?'
     
     'No names, you telltale, or I'll skin and eat you,
     babbling in every ear things that don't concern you!
     If you tell Willowman where I've gone, I'll burn you,
     roast you on a willowspit. That'll end your prying!'
     
     Willowwren cocked her tail, piped as she went flying:
     'Catch me first, catch me first! No names are needed.
     I'll perch on his hither ear: the message will be heeded.
     "Down by Mithe", I'll say, "just as sun is sinking"
     Hurry up, hurry up! That's the time for drinking!'
     
     Tom laughed to himself: 'Maybe then I'll go there.
     I might go by other ways, but today I'll row there.'
     
     He shaved oars, patched his boat; from hidden creek he hauled her
     through reed and sallowbrake, under leaning alder,
     then down the river went, singing: 'Sillysallow,
     Flow withywillowstream over deep and shallow!'
     'Whee! Tom Bombadil! Whither be you going,
     bobbing in a cockleboat, down the river rowing?'
     
     'Maybe to Brandywine along the Withywindle;
     maybe friends of mine fire for me will kindle
     down by the Haysend. Little folk I know there,
     kind at the day's end. Now and then I go there'.
     'Take word to my kin, bring me back their tidings!
     Tell me of diving pools and the fishes' hidings!'
     
     'Nay then,' said Bombadil, 'I am only rowing
     just to smell the water like, not on errands going'.
     
     'Tee hee! Cocky Tom! Mind your tub don't founder!
     Look out for willowsnags! I'd laugh to see you flounder'.
     
     'Talk less, Fisher Blue! Keep your kindly wishes!
     Fly off and preen yourself with the bones of fishes!
     Gay lord on your bough, at home a dirty varlet
     living in a sloven house, though your breast be scarlet.
     I've heard of fisherbirds beak in air adangling
     to show how the wind is set: that's an end of angling!'
     
     The King's fisher shut his beak, winked his eye, as singing
     Tom passed under bough. Flash! then he went winging;
     dropped down jewelblue a feather, and Tom caught it
     gleaming in a sunray: a pretty gift he thought it.
     He stuck it in his tall hat, the old feather casting:
     'Blue now for Tom', he said, "a merry hue and lasting!'
     
     Rings swirled round his boat, he saw the bubbles quiver.
     Tom slapped his oar, smack! at a shadow in the river.
     
     'Hoosh! Tom Bombadil! 'Tis long since last I met you.
     Turned waterboatman, eh? What if I upset you?'
     
     'What? Why, Whiskerlad, I'd ride you down the river.
     My fingers on your back would set your hide ashiver.'
     'Pish, Tom Bombadil! I'll go and tell my mother;
     "Call all our kin to come, father, sister, brother!
     Tom's gone mad as a coot with wooden legs: he's paddling
     down Withywindle stream, an old tub astraddling!"'
     
     'I'll give your otterfell to Barrowwights. They'll taw you!
     Then smother you in goldrings! Your mother if she saw you,
     she'd never know her son, unless 'twas by a whisker.
     Nay, don't tease old Tom, until you be far brisker!'
     
     'Whoosh! said otterlad, riverwater spraying
     over Tom's hat and all; set the boat aswaying,
     dived down under it, and by the bank lay peering,
     till Tom's merry song faded out of hearing.
     
     Old Swan of Elvetisle sailed past him proudly,
     gave Tom a black look, snorted at him loudly.
     Tom laughed: 'You old cob, do you miss your feather?
     Give me a new one then! The old was worn by weather.
     Could you speak a fair word, I would love you dearer:
     long neck and dumb throat, but still a haughty sneerer!
     If one day the King returns, in upping he may take you,
     brand your yellow bill, and less lordly make you!'
     Old Swan huffed his wings, hissed, and paddled faster;
     in his wake bobbing on Tom went rowing after.
     
     Tom came to Withyweir. Down the river rushing
     foamed into Windlereach, abubbling and asplashing;
     bore Tom over stone spinning like a windfall,
     bobbing like a bottlecork, to the hythe at Grindwall.
     
     Hoy! Here's Woodman Tom with his bill?beard on!'
     laughed all the little folk of Haysend and Breredon.
     'Ware, Tom' We'll shoot you dead with our bows and arrows'
     We don't let Forestfolk nor bogies from the Barrows
     cross over Brandywine by cockleboat nor ferry'.
     'Fie, little fatbellies! Don't ye make so merry!
     
     I've seen hobbitfolk digging holes to hide 'em,
     frightened if a horny goat or a badger eyed 'em,
     afeared of the moonybeams, their own shadows shunning.
     I'll call the orks on you: that'll send you running!'
     
     'You may call, Woodman Tom. And you can talk your beard off.
     Three arrows in your hat! You we're not afeared of!
     Where would you go to now? If for beer you're making,
     the barrels aint deep enough in Breredon for your slaking!'
     
     'Away over Brandywine by Shirebourn I'd be going,
     but too swift for cockleboat (he river now is flowing.
     I'd bless little folk that took me in their wherry,
     wish them evenings fair and many mornings merry'.
     
     Red flowed the Brandywine: with flame the river kindled.
     as sun sank beyond the Shire, and then to grey it dwindled.
     Mithe Steps empty stood. None was there to greet him.
     Silent the Causeway lay. Said Tom: 'A merry meeting!'
     
     Tom slumped along the road, as the light was failing.
     Rushey lamps gleamed ahead. He heard a voice him hailing.
     'Whoa there!' Ponies stopped, wheels halted sliding.
     Tom went plodding past. never looked beside him.
     
     'Ho there! beggarman tramping in the Marish!
     What's your business here? Hat all stuck with arrows!
     Someone's warned you off, caught you at your sneaking?
     Come here! Tell me now what it is you're seeking!
     Shireale. I'll be bound, though you've not a penny.
     I'll bid them lock their doors, and then you won't get any''
     
     'Well, well. Muddyfeet! From one that's late for meeting
     away back by the Mithe that's a surly greeting!
     You old farmer fat that cannot walk for wheezing,
     cartdrawn like a sack, ought to be more pleasing.
     Pennywise tubonlegs! A beggar can't be chooser,
     or else I'd bid you go, and you would be the loser.
     Come, Maggot! Help me up! A tankard now you owe me.
     Even in cockshut light an old friend should know me!'
     
     Laughing they drove away, in Rushey never halting,
     though the inn open stood and they could smell the mailing.
     They turned down Maggot's Lane, rattling and bumping,
     Tom in the farmer's cart dancing round and jumping.
     Stars shone on Bamfurlong, and Maggot's house was lighted;
     fire in the kitchen burned to welcome the benighted.
     
     Maggot's sons bowed at door, his daughters did their curtsy,
     his wife brought tankards out for those that might be thirsty.
     Songs they had and merry tales the supping and the dancing;
     Goodman Maggot there for all his belt was prancing,
     Tom did a hornpipe when he was not quaffing,
     daughters did the Springlering, goodwife did the laughing.
     
     When others went to bed in hay, fern, or feather,
     close in the inglenook they laid their heads together,
     old Tom and Muddyfeet, swapping all the tidings
     from Barrowdowns to Tower Hills: of walkings and of ridings;
     of wheatear and barleycorn, of sowing and of reaping;
     queer tales from Bree, and talk at smithy, mill, and cheaping;
     rumours in whispering trees, southwind in the larches,
     tall Watchers by the Ford, Shadows on the marches.
     
     Old Maggot slept at last in chair beside the embers.
     Ere dawn Tom was gone: as dreams one half remembers,
     some merry, some sad, and some of hidden warning.
     None heard the door unlocked; a shower of rain at morning
     his footprints washed away, at Mithe he left no traces,
     at Haysend they heard no song nor sound of heavy paces.
     
     Three days his boat lay by the hythe at Grindwall,
     and then one mom was gone back up Withywindle.
     
     Otterfolk, hobbits said, came by night and loosed her,
     dragged her over weir, and up stream they pushed her.
     
     Out from Elvetisle Old Swan came sailing,
     in beak took her painter up in the water trailing,
     drew her proudly on; otters swam beside her
     round old Willowman's crooked roots to guide her;
     the King's fisher perched on bow, on thwart the wren was singing,
     merrily the cockleboat homeward they were bringing.
     To Tom's creek they came at last. Otterlad said: 'Whish now!
     What's a coot without his legs, or a unless fish now?'
     O! sillysallowwillowstream! The oars they'd left behind them!
     Long they lay at Grindwall hythe for Tom to come and find them.
     
     
     
3
     
ERRANTRY
     
     
     There was a merry passenger,
     a messenger, a mariner:
     he built a gilded gondola
     to wander in, and had in her
     a load of yellow oranges
     and porridge for his provender;
     he perfumed her with marjoram
     and cardamom and lavender.
     
     He called the winds of argosies
     with cargoes in to carry him
     across the rivers seventeen
     that lay between to tarry him.
     He landed all in loneliness
     where stonily the pebbles on
     the running river Derrilyn
     goes merrily for ever on.
     He journeyed then through meadowlands
     to Shadowland that dreary lay,
     and under hill and over hill
     went roving still a weary way.
     
     He sat and sang a melody,
     his errantry atarrying;
     he begged a pretty butterfly
     that fluttered by to marry him.
     She scorned him and she scoffed at him,
     she laughed at him unpitying;
     so long he studied wizardry
     and sigaldry and smithying.
     
     He wove a tissue airythin
     to snare her in; to follow her
     he made him beetleleather wing
     and feather wing of swallowhair
     He caught her in bewilderment
     with filament of spiderthread;
     he made her soft pavilions
     of lilies, and a bridal bed
     of flowers and of thistledown
     to nestle down and rest her in;
     and silken webs of filmy white
     and silver light he dressed her in.
     
     He threaded gems in necklaces,
     but recklessly she squandered them
     and fell to bitter quarrelling;
     then sorrowing he wandered on,
     and there he left her withering,
     as shivering he fled away;
     with windy weather following
     on swallowwing he sped away.
     
     He passed the archipelagoes
     where yellow grows the marigold,
     where countless silver fountains are,
     and mountains are of fairygold.
     He took to war and foraying,
     aharrying beyond the sea,
     and roaming over Belmarie
     and Thellamie and Fantasie.
     
     He made a shield and morion
     of coral and of ivory,
     a sword he made of emerald,
     and terrible his rivalry
     with elvenknights of Aerie
     and Faerie, with paladins
     that goldenhaired and shiningeyed
     came riding by and challenged him.
     
     Of crystal was his habergeon,
     his scabbard of chalcedony;
     with silver tipped at plenilune
     his spear was hewn of ebony.
     His javelins were of malachite
     and stalactite–he brandished them,
     and went and fought the dragonflies
     of Paradise, and vanquished them.
     
     He battled with the Dumbledors,
     the Hummerhorns, and Honeybees,
     and won the Golden Honeycomb;
     and running home on sunny seas
     in ship of leaves and gossamer
     with blossom for a canopy,
     he sat and sang, and furbished up
     and burnished up his panoply.
     
     He tarried for a little while
     in little isles that lonely lay,
     and found there naught but blowing grass;
     and so at last the only way
     he took, and turned, and coming home
     with honeycomb, to memory
     his message came, and errand too!
     In derringdo and glamoury
     he had forgot them, journeying
     and tourneying, a wanderer.
     So now he must depart again
     and start again bis gondola,
     for ever still a messenger,
     a passenger, a tarrier,
     aroving as a feather does,
     a weatherdriven mariner.
     
     
     
4
     
LITTLE PRINCESS MEE
     
     
     Lovely was she
     As in elvensong is told:
     She had pearls in hair
     All threaded fair;
     Of gossamer shot with gold
     Was her kerchief made,
     And a silver braid
     Of stars about her throat.
     Of mothweb light
     All moonlitwhite
     She wore a woven coat,
     And round her kirtle
     Was bound a girdle
     Sewn with diamond dew.
     
     She walked by day
     Under mantle grey
     And hood of clouded blue;
     But she went by night
     All glittering bright
     Under the starlit sky,
     And her slippers frail
     Of fishes' mail
     Flashed as she went by
     To her dancingpool,
     And on mirror cool
     Of windless water played.
     As a mist of light
     In whirling flight
     A glint like glass she made
     Wherever her feet
     Of silver fleet
     Flicked the dancingfloor.
     
     She looked on high
     To the roofless sky,
     And she looked to the shadowy shore;
     Then round she went,
     And her eyes she bent
     And saw beneath her go
     A Princess Shee
     As fair as Mee:
     They were dancing toe to toe!
     
     Shee was as light
     As Mee, and as bright;
     But Shee was, strange to tell,
     Hanging down
     With starry crown
     Into a bottomless well!
     Her gleaming eyes
     In great surprise
     Looked up to the eyes of Mee:
     A marvellous thing,
     Headdown to swing
     Above a starry sea!
     
     Only their feet
     Could ever meet;
     For where the ways might lie
     To find a land
     Where they do not stand
     But hang down in the sky
     No one could tell
     Nor learn in spell
     In all the elvenlore.
     
     So still on her own
     An elf alone
     Dancing as before
     With pearls in hair
     And kirtle fair
     And slippers frail
     Of fishes' mail went Mee:
     Of fishes' mail
     And slippers frail
     And kirtle fair
     With pearls in hair went Shee!
     
     
     
5
     
THE MAN IN THE MOON STAYED UP TOO LATE
     
     
     There is an inn, a merry old inn
     beneath an old grey hill,
     And there they brew a beer so brown
     That the Man in the Moon himself came down
     one night to drink his fill.
     
     The ostler has a tipsy cat
     that plays a fivestringed fiddle;
     And up and down he runs his bow,
     Now squeaking high, now purring low,
     now sawing in the middle.
     
     The landlord keeps a little dog
     that is mighty fond of jokes;
     When there's good cheer among the guests,
     He cocks an ear at all the jests
     and laughs unlit he choices.
     
     They also keep a horned cow
     as proud as any queen;
     But music turns her head like ale,
     And makes her wave her tufted tail
     and dance upon the green.
     
     And O! the row of silver dishes
     and the store of silver spoons!
     For Sunday there's a special pair,
     And these they polish up with care
     on Saturday afternoons.
     
     The Man in the Moon was drinking deep,
     and the cat began to wail;
     ? dish and a spoon on the table danced,
     ?he cow in the garden madly pranced,
     and the little dog chased his tail.
     
     The Man in the Moon took another mug,
     and then rolled beneath his chair;
     And there he dozed and dreamed of ale,
     Till in the sky the stars were pale,
     and dawn was in the air.
     
     The ostler said to his tipsy cat:
     'The white horses of the Moon,
     They neigh and champ their silver bits;
     "But their master's been and drowned his wits,
     and the Sun'll be rising soon!'
     
     So the cat on his fiddle played heydiddlediddle,
     a jig that would wake the dead:
     He squeaked and sawed and quickened the tune,
     While the landlord shook the Man in the Moon:
     'It's after three!' he said.
     
     They rolled the Man slowly up the hill
     and bundled him into the Moon,
     While his horses galloped up in rear,
     And the cow came capering like a deer,
     and a dish ran up with a spoon.
     
     Now quicker the fiddle went deedledumdiddle;
     the dog began to roar,
     The cow and the horses stood on their heads;
     The guests all bounded from their beds
     and danced upon the floor.
     
     With a ping and a pong the fiddlestrings broke!
     the cow jumped over the Moon,
     And the little dog laughed to see such fun,
     And the Saturday dish went off at a run
     with the silver Sunday spoon.
     
     The round Moon rolled behind the hill,
     as the Sun raised up her head.
     She hardly believed her fiery eyes;
     For though it was day, to her surprise
     they all went back to bed!
     
     
     
6
     
THE MAN IN THE MOON CAME DOWN TOO SOON
     
     
     The Man in the Moon had silver shoon,
     and his beard was of silver thread;
     With opals crowned and pearls all bound
     about his girdlestead,
     In his mantle grey he walked one day
     across a shining floor,
     And with crystal key in secrecy
     he opened an ivory door.
     
     On a filigree stair of glimmering hair
     then lightly down he went,
     And merry was he at last to be free
     on a mad adventure bent.
     In diamonds white he had lost delight;
     he was tired of his minaret
     Of tall moonstone that towered alone
     on a lunar mountain set.
     
     He would dare any peril for ruby and beryl
     to broider his pale attire,
     For new diadems of lustrous gems,
     emerald and sapphire.
     So was lonely too with nothing to do
     but stare at the world of gold
     And heark to the hum that would distantly come
     as gaily round it rolled.
     
     At plenilune in his argent moon
     in his heart he longed for Fire:
     Not the limpid lights of wan selenites;
     for red was his desire,
     For crimson and rose and emberglows,
     for flame with burning tongue,
     For the scarlet skies in a swift sunrise
     when a stormy day is young.
     
     He'd have seas of blues, and the living hues
     of forest green and fen;
     And he yearned for the mirth of the populous earth
     and the sanguine blood of men.
     He coveted song, and laughter long,
     and viands hot, and wine,
     Eating pearly cakes of light snowflakes
     and drinking thin moonshine.
     
     He twinkled his feet, as he thought of the meat,
     of pepper, and punch galore;
     And he tripped unaware on his slanting stair,
     and like a meteor,
     A star in flight, ere Yule one night
     flickering down he fell
     From his laddery path to a foaming bath
     in the windy Bay of Bel.
     
     He began to think, lest he melt and sink,
     what in the moon to do,
     When a fisherman's boat found him far afloat
     to the amazement of the crew,
     Caught in their net all shimmering wet
     in a phosphorescent sheen
     Of bluey whites and opal lights
     and delicate liquid green.
     
     Against his wish with the morning fish
     they packed him back to land:
     'You had best get a bed in an inn', they said;
     'the town is near at hand'.
     Only the knell of one slow bell
     high in the Seaward Tower
     Announced the news of his moonsick cruise
     at that unseemly hour.
     
     Not a hearth was laid, not a breakfast made,
     and dawn was cold and damp.
     There were ashes for fire, and for grass the mire,
     for the sun a smoking lamp
     In a dim backstreet. Not a man did he meet,
     no voice was raised in song;
     There were snores instead, for all folk were abed
     and still would slumber long.
     
     He knocked as he passed on doors locked fast,
     and called and cried in vain,
     Till he came to an inn that had light within,
     and tapped at a windowpane.
     A drowsy cook gave a surly look,
     and 'What do you want?' said he.
     'I want fire and gold and songs of old
     and red wine flowing free!'
     
     'You won't get them here', said the cook with a leer,
     'but you may come inside.
     Silver I lack and silk to my back–
     maybe I'll let you bide'.
     A silver gift the latch to lift,
     a pearl to pass the door;
     For a seat by the cook in the inglenook
     it cost him twenty more.
     
     For hunger or drouth naught passed his mouth
     till he gave both crown and cloak;
     And all that he got, in an earthen pot
     broken and black with smoke,
     Was porridge cold and two days old
     to eat with a wooden spoon.
     For puddings of Yule with plums, poor fool,
     he arrived so much too soon:
     An unwary guest on a lunatic quest
     from the Mountains of the Moon.
     
     
     
7
     
THE STONE TROLL
     
     
     Troll sat alone on his seat of stone,
     And munched and mumbled a bare old bone;
     For many a year he had gnawed it near,
     For meat was hard to come by.
     Done by! Gum by!
     In a cave in the hills he dwelt alone,
     And meat was hard to come by.
     
     Up came Tom with his big boots on.
     Said he to Troll: 'Pray, what is yon?
     For it looks like the shin o' roy nuncle Tim,
     As should be alyin' in graveyard.
     Caveyard! Paveyard!
     This many a year has Tim been gone,
     And I thought he were lyin' in graveyard'.
     
     'My lad', said Troll, 'this bone I stole.
     But what be bones that lie in a hole?
     Thy nuncle was dead as a lump o' lead,
     Afore I found his shinbone.
     Tinbone! Thinbone!
     He can spare a share for a poor old troll;
     For he don't need his shinbone'.
     
     Said Tom: 'I don't see why the likes o' thee
     Without axin' leave should go makin' free
     With the shank or the shin o' my father's kin;
     So hand the old bone over!
     Rover! Trover!
     Though dead he be, it belongs to he;
     So hand the old bone over!'
     
     'For a couple o' pins', says Troll, and grins,
     'I'll eat thee too, and gnaw thy shins.
     A bit o' fresh meat will go down sweet!
     I'll try my teeth on thee now.
     ??? now! See now!
     I'm tired o' gnawing old bones and skins;
     I've a mind to dine on thee now'.
     
     But just as he thought his dinner was caught,
     He found his hands had hold of naught.
     Before he could mind, Tom slipped behind
     And gave him the boot to larn him.
     Warn him! Darn him!
     A bump o' the boot on the seat, Tom thought,
     Would be the way to larn him.
     
     But harder than stone is the flesh and bone
     Of a troll that sits in the hills alone.
     As well set your boot to the mountain's root,
     For the seat of a troll don't feel it.
     Peel it! Heal it!
     Old Troll laughed, when he heard Tom groan,
     And he knew his toes could feel it.
     
     Tom's leg is game, since home he came,
     And his bootless foot is lasting lame;
     But Troll don't care, and he's still there
     With the bone he boned from its owner.
     Doner! Boner!
     Troll's old seat is still the same,
     And the bone he boned from its owner!
     
     
     
8
     
PERRYTHEWINKLE
     
     
     The Lonely Troll he sat on a stone
     and sang a mournful lay:
     'O why, O why must I live on my own
     in the hills of Faraway?
     My folk are gone beyond recall
     and take no thought of me;
     alone I'm left, the last of all
     from Weathertop to the Sea'.
     
     'I steal no gold, I drink no beer,
     I eat no kind of meat;
     but People slam their doors in fear,
     whenever they hear my feet.
     O how I wish that they were neat,
     and my hands were not so rough!
     Yet my heart is soft, my smile is sweet,
     and my cooking good enough.'
     
     'Come, come!' he thought, 'this will not do!
     I must go and find a friend;
     awalking soft I'll wander through
     the Shire from end to end'.
     Down he went, and he walked all night
     with his feet in boots of fur;
     to Delving he came in the morning light,
     when folk were just astir.
     
     He looked around, and who did he meet
     but old Mrs. Bunce and all
     with umbrella and basket walking the street;
     and he smiled and stopped to call:
     'Good morning, ma'am! Good day to you!
     I hope I find you well?'
     But she dropped umbrella and basket too,
     and yelled a frightful yell.
     
     Old Pott the Mayor was strolling near;
     when he heard that awful sound,
     he turned all purple and pink with fear,
     and dived down underground.
     The Lonely Troll was hurt and sad:
     'Don't go!' he gently said,
     but old Mrs. Bunce ran home like mad
     and hid beneath her bed.
     
     The Troll went on to the marketplace
     and peeped above the stalls;
     the sheep went wild when they saw his face,
     and the geese flew over the walls.
     Old Farmer Hogg he spilled his ale,
     Bill Butcher threw a knife,
     and Grip his dog, he turned his tail
     and ran to save his life.
     
     The old Troll sadly sat and wept
     outside the Lockholes gate,
     and PerrytheWinkle up he crept
     and patted him on the pate.
     'O why do you weep, you great big lump?
     You're better outside than in!'
     He gave the Troll a friendly thump,
     and laughed to see him grin.
     
     'O PerrytheWinkle boy', he cried,
     'come, you're the lad for me!
     Now if you're willing to take a ride,
     I'll carry you home to tea'.
     He jumped on his back and held on tight,
     and 'Off you go!' said he;
     and the Winkle had a feast that night,
     and sat on the old Troll's knee.
     
     There were pikelets, there was buttered toast,
     and jam, and cream, and cake,
     and the Winkle strove to eat the most,
     though his buttons all should break.
     The kettle sang, the fire was hot,
     the pot was large and brown,
     and the Winkle tried to drink the lot,
     in tea though he should drown.
     
     When full and tight were coat and skin,
     they rested without speech,
     till the old Troll said: 'I'll now begin
     the baker's art to teach,
     the making of beautiful cramsome bread,
     of bannocks light and brown;
     and then you can sleep on a heatherbed
     with pillows of owlets' down'.
     
     'Young Winkle, where've you been?' they said.
     'I've been to a fulsome tea,
     and I feel so fat, for I have fed
     on cramsome bread', said he.
     'But where, my lad, in the Shire was that?
     Or out in Bree?' said they.
     But Winkle he up and answered flat:
     'I aint agoing to say'.
     
     'But I know where', said Peeping Jack,
     'I watched him ride away:
     he went upon the old Troll's back
     to the hills of Faraway'.
     Then all the People went with a will,
     by pony, cart, or moke,
     until they came to a house in a hill
     and saw a chimney smoke.
     
     They hammered upon the old Troll's door.
     'A beautiful cramsome cake
     O bake for us, please, or two, or more;
     O bake!' they cried, 'O bake!'
     'Go home, go home!' the old Troll said.
     'I never invited you.
     Only on Thursdays I bake my bread,
     and only for a few'.
     
     'Go home! Go home! There's some mistake.
     My house is far too small;
     and I've no pikelets, cream, or cake:
     the Winkle has eaten all!
     You Jack, and Hogg, old Bunce and Pott
     I wish no more to see.
     Be off! Be off now all the lot!
     The Winkle's the boy for me!'
     
     Now PerrytheWinkle grew so fat
     through eating of cramsome bread,
     his weskit bust, and never a hat
     would sit upon his head;
     for Every Thursday he went to tea,
     and sat on the kitchen floor,
     and smaller the old Troll seemed to be,
     as he grew more and more.
     
     The Winkle a Baker great became,
     as still is said in song;
     from the Sea to Bree there went the fame
     of his bread both short and long.
     But it weren't so good as the cramsome bread;
     no butter so rich and free,
     as Every Thursday the old Troll spread
     for PerrytheWinkle's tea.
     
     
     
9
     
THE MEWLIPS
     
     
     The shadows where the Mewlips dwell
     Are dark and wet as ink,
     And slow and softly rings their bell,
     As in the slime you sink.
     
     You sink into the slime, who dare
     To knock upon their door,
     While down the grinning gargoyles stare
     And noisome waters pour.
     
     Beside the rotting riverstrand
     The drooping willows weep,
     And gloomily the gorcrows stand
     Croaking in their sleep.
     
     Over the Merlock Mountains a long and weary way,
     In a mouldy valley where the trees are grey,
     By a dark pool's borders without wind or tide,
     Moonless and sunless, the Mewlips hide.
     
     The cellars where the Mewlips sit
     Are deep and dank and cold
     With single sickly candle lit;
     And there they count their gold.
     
     Their walls are wet, their ceilings drip;
     Their feet upon the floor
     Go softly with a squishflapflip,
     As they sidle to the door.
     
     They peep out slyly; through a crack
     Their feeling fingers creep,
     And when they've finished, in a sack
     Your bones they lake to keep.
     
     Beyond the Merlock Mountains, a long and lonely road.
     Through the spidershadows and the marsh of Tode,
     And through the wood of hanging trees and the gallowsweed,
     You go to find the Mewlips – and the Mewlips feed.
     
     
     
10
     
OLIPHAUNT
     
     
     Grey as a mouse,
     Big as a house,
     Nose like a snake,
     I make the earth shake,
     As I tramp through the grass;
     Trees crack as I pass.
     With horns in my mouth
     I walk in the South,
     Flapping big ears.
     Beyond count of years
     I stump round and round,
     Never lie on the ground,
     Not even to die.
     Oliphaunt am I,
     Biggest of all,
     Huge, old, and tall.
     If ever you'd met me,
     You wouldn't forget me.
     If you never do,
     You won't think I'm true;
     But old Oliphaunt am I.
     And I never lie.
     
     
     
11
     
FASTITOCALON
     
     
     Look, there is Fastitocalon!
     An island good to land upon,
     Although 'tis rather bare.
     Come, leave the sea! And let us run,
     Or dance, or lie down in the sun!
     See, gulls are sitting there!
     Beware!
     Gulls do not sink.
     There they may sit, or strut and prink:
     Their part it is to tip the wink,
     If anyone should dare
     Upon that isle to settle,
     Or only for a while to get
     Relief from sickness or the wet,
     Or maybe boil a kettle.
     Ah, foolish folk, who land on HIM,
     And little fires proceed to trim
     And hope perhaps for tea!
     It may be that His shell is thick,
     He seems to sleep; but He is quick,
     And floats now in the sea
     With guile;
     And when He hears their tapping feet,
     Or faintly feels the sudden heat,
     With smile
     HE dives,
     And promptly turning upsidedown
     He tips them off, and deep they drown,
     And lose their silly lives
     To their surprise,
     Be wise!
     There are many monsters in the Sea,
     But none so perilous as HE,
     Old horny Fastitocalon,
     Whose mighty kindred all have gone,
     The last of the old Turtlefish.
     So if to save your life you wish
     Then I advise:
     Pay heed to sailors' ancient lore,
     Set foot on no uncharted shore!
     Or better still,
     Your days at peace on Middleearth
     In mirth
     Fulfill!
     
     
     
12
     
THE CAT
     
     
     The fat cat on the mat
     may seem to dream
     of nice mice that suffice
     for him, or cream;
     but he free, maybe,
     walks in thought
     unbowed, proud, where loud
     roared and fought
     his kin, lean and slim,
     or deep in den
     in the East feasted on beasts
     and tender men.
     The giant lion with iron
     claw in paw,
     and huge ruthless tooth
     in gory jaw;
     the paid darkstarred,
     fleet upon feet,
     that oft soft from aloft
     leaps on his meat
     where woods loom in gloom
     far now they be,
     fierce and free,
     and tamed is he;
     but fat cat on the mat
     kept as a pet,
     he does not forget.
     
     
     
13
     
SHADOWBRIDE
     
     
     There was a man who dwelt alone,
     as day and night went past
     he sat as still as carven stone,
     and yet no shadow cast.
     The white owls perched upon his head
     beneath the winter moon;
     they wiped their beaks and thought him dead
     under the stars of June.
     
     There came a lady clad in grey
     in the twilight shining:
     one moment she would stand and stay,
     her hair with flowers entwining.
     He woke, as had he sprung of stone,
     and broke the spell that bound him;
     he clasped her fast, both flesh and bone,
     and wrapped her shadow round him.
     
     There never more she walks her ways
     by sun or moon or star;
     she dwells below where neither days
     nor any nights there are.
     But once a year when caverns yawn
     and hidden things awake,
     they dance together then till dawn
     and a single shadow make.
     
     
     
14
     
THE HOARD
     
     
     When the moon was new and the sun young
     of silver and gold the gods sung:
     in the green grass they silver spilled,
     and the white waters they with gold filled.
     Ere the pit was dug or Hell yawned,
     ere dwarf was bred or dragon spawned,
     there were Elves of old, and strong spells
     under green hills in hollow dells
     they sang as they wrought many fair things,
     and the bright crowns of the Elfkings.
     But their doom fell, and their song waned,
     by iron hewn and by steel chained.
     Greed that sang not, nor with mouth smiled,
     in dark holes their wealth piled,
     graven silver and carven gold:
     over Elvenhome the shadow rolled.
     
     There was an old dwarf in a dark cave,
     to silver and gold his fingers clave;
     with hammer and tongs and anvilstone
     he worked his hands to the hard bone.
     and coins he made, and strings of rings,
     and thought to buy the power of kings.
     But his eyes grew dim and his ears dull
     and the skin yellow on his old skull;
     through his bony claw with a pale sheen
     the stony jewels slipped unseen.
     No feet he heard, though the earth quaked.
     when the young dragon his thirst slaked.
     and the stream smoked at his dark door.
     The flames hissed on the dank floor,
     and he died alone in the red fire;
     his bones were ashes in the hot mire.
     
     There was an old dragon under grey stone;
     his red eyes blinked as he lay alone.
     His joy was dead and his youth spent,
     he was knobbed and wrinkled, and his limbs bent
     in the long years to his gold chained;
     in his heart's furnace the fire waned.
     To his belly's slime gems stuck thick,
     silver and gold he would snuff and lick:
     he knew the place of the least ring
     beneath the shadow of his black wing.
     Of thieves he thought on his hard bed,
     and dreamed that on their flesh he fed,
     their bones crushed, and their blood drank:
     his ears drooped and his breath sank.
     Mailrings rang. He heard them not.
     A voice echoed in his deep grot:
     a young warrior with a bright sword
     called him forth to defend his hoard.
     His teeth were knives, and of horn his hide,
     but iron tore him, and his flame died.
     
     There was an old king on a high throne:
     his white beard lay on knees of bone;
     his mouth savoured neither meat nor drink,
     nor his ears song; he could only think
     of his huge chest with carven lid
     where pale gems and gold lay hid
     in secret treasury in the dark ground;
     its strong doors were ironbound.
     The swords of his thanes were dull with rust,
     his glory fallen, his rule unjust,
     his halls hollow, and his bowers cold,
     but king he was of elvish gold.
     He heard not the horns in the mountainpass,
     he smelt not the blood on the trodden grass,
     but his halls were burned, his kingdom lost;
     in a cold pit his bones were tossed.
     
     There is an old hoard in a dark rock,
     forgotten behind doors none can unlock;
     that grim gate no man can pass.
     On the mound grows the green grass;
     there sheep feed and the larks soar,
     and the wind blows from the seashore.
     The old hoard the Night shall keep,
     while earth waits and the Elves sleep.
     
     
     
15
     
THE SEABELL
     
     
     I walked by the sea, and there came to me,
     as a starbeam on the wet sand,
     a white shell like a seabell;
     trembling it lay in my wet hand.
     In my fingers shaken I heard waken
     a ding within, by a harbour bar
     a buoy swinging, a call ringing
     over endless seas, faint now and far.
     
     Then I saw a boat silently float
     on the nighttide, empty and grey.
     'It is later than late! Why do we wait?'
     I leapt in and cried: 'Bear me away!'
     
     It bore me away, wetted with spray,
     wrapped in a mist, wound in a sleep,
     to a forgotten strand in a strange land.
     In the twilight beyond the deep
     I heard a seabell swing in the swell,
     dinging, dinging, and the breakers roar
     on the hidden teeth of a perilous reef;
     and at last I came to a long shore.
     White it glimmered, and the sea simmered
     with starmirrors in a silver net;
     cliffs of stone pale as ruelbone
     in the moonfoam were gleaming wet.
     Glittering sand slid through my hand,
     dust of pearl and jewelgrist,
     trumpets of opal, roses of coral,
     flutes of green and amethyst.
     But under cliffeaves there were glooming caves,
     weedcurtained, dark and grey;
     a cold air stirred in my hair,
     and the light waned, as I hurried away.
     
     Down from a hill ran a green rill;
     its water I drank to my heart's ease.
     Up its fountainstair to a country fair
     of evereve I came, far from the seas,
     climbing into meadows of fluttering shadows:
     flowers lay there like fallen stars,
     and on a blue pool, glassy and cool,
     like floating moons the nenuphars.
     Alders were sleeping, and willows weeping
     by a slow river of rippling weeds;
     gladdonswords guarded the fords,
     and green spears, and arrowreeds.
     
     There was echo of song all the evening long
     down in the valley; many a thing
     running to and fro: hares white as snow,
     voles out of holes; moths on the wing
     with lanterneyes; in quiet surprise
     brocks were staring out of dark doors.
     I heard dancing there, music in the air,
     feet going quick on the green floors.
     But whenever I came it was ever the same:
     the feet fled, and all was still;
     never a greeting, only the fleeting
     pipes, voices, horns on the hill.
     
     Of riverleaves and the rushsheaves
     I made me a mantle of jewelgreen,
     a tall wand to hold, and a flag of gold;
     my eyes shone like the starsheen.
     With flowers crowned I stood on a mound,
     and shrill as a call at cockcrow
     proudly I cried: 'Why do you hide?
     Why do none speak, wherever I go?
     Here now I stand, king of this land,
     with gladdonsword and reedmace.
     
     Answer my call! Come forth all!
     Speak to me words! Show me a face!'
     
     Black came a cloud as a nightshroud.
     Like a dark mole groping I went,
     to the ground falling, on my hands crawling
     with eyes blind and my back bent.
     I crept to a wood: silent it stood
     in its dead leaves, bare were its boughs.
     There must I sit, wandering in wit,
     while owls snored in their hollow house.
     For a year and a day there must I stay:
     beetles were tapping in the rotten trees,
     spiders were weaving, in the mould heaving
     puffballs loomed about my knees.
     
     At last there came light in my long night,
     and I saw my hair hanging grey.
     'Bent though I be, I must find the sea!
     I have lost myself, and I know not the way,
     but let me be gone!' Then I stumbled on;
     like a hunting bat shadow was over me;
     in my ears dinned a withering wind,
     and with ragged briars I tried to cover me.
     My hands were torn and my knees worn,
     and years were heavy upon my back,
     when the rain in my face took a salt taste,
     and I smelled the smell of seawrack.
     
     Birds came sailing, mewing, wailing;
     I heard voices in cold caves,
     seals barking, and rocks snarling,
     and in spoutholes the gulping of waves.
     Winter came fast; into a mist I passed,
     to land's end my years I bore;
     snow was in the air, ice in my hair,
     darkness was lying on the last shore.
     
     There still afloat waited the boat,
     in the tide lifting, its prow tossing.
     Weary I lay, as it bore me away,
     the waves climbing, the seas crossing,
     passing old hulls clustered with gulls
     and great ships laden with light,
     coming to haven, dark as a raven,
     silent as snow, deep in the night.
     
     Houses were shuttered, wind round them muttered,
     roads were empty. I sat by a door,
     and where drizzling rain poured down a drain
     I cast away all that I bore:
     in my clutching hand some grains of sand,
     and a seashell silent and dead.
     Never will my ear that bell hear,
     never my feet that shore tread
     Never again, as in sad lane,
     in blind alley and in long street
     ragged I walk. To myself I talk;
     for still they speak not, men that I meet.
     
     
     
16
     
THE LAST SHIP
     
     
     Firiel looked out at three o'clock:
     the grey night was going;
     far away a golden cock
     clear and shrill was crowing.
     The trees were dark, and the dawn pale,
     waking birds were cheeping,
     a wind moved cool and frail
     through dim leaves creeping.
     
     She watched the gleam at window grow,
     till the long light was shimmering
     on land and leaf; on grass below
     grey dew was glimmering.
     Over the floor her white feet crept,
     down the stair they twinkled,
     through the grass they dancing stepped
     all with dew besprinkled.
     
     Her gown had jewels upon its hem,
     as she ran down to the river,
     and leaned upon a willowstem,
     and watched the water quiver.
     A kingfisher plunged down like a stone
     in a blue flash falling,
     bending reeds were softly blown,
     lilyleaves were sprawling.
     
     A sudden music to her came,
     as she stood there gleaming
     with free hair in the morning's flame
     on her shoulders streaming.
     Flutes there were, and harps were wrung,
     and there was sound of singing,
     like windvoices keen and young
     and far bells ringing.
     
     A ship with golden beak and oar
     and timbers white came gliding;
     swans went sailing on before,
     her tall prow guiding.
     Fair folk out of Elvenland
     in silvergrey were rowing,
     and three with crowns she saw there stand
     with bright hair flowing.
     
     With harp in hand they sang their song
     to the slow oars swinging:
     'Green is the land, the leaves are long,
     and the birds are singing.
     Many a day with dawn of gold
     this earth will lighten,
     many a flower will yet unfold,
     ere the cornfields whiten.
     
     'Then whither go ye, boatmen fair,
     down the river gliding?
     To twilight and to secret lair
     in the great forest hiding?
     To Northern isles and shores of stone
     on strong swans flying,
     by cold waves to dwell alone
     with the white gulls crying?'
     
     'Nay!' they answered. 'Far away
     on the last road faring,
     leaving western havens grey,
     the seas of shadow daring,
     we go back to Elvenhome,
     where the White Tree is growing,
     and the Star shines upon the foam
     on the last shore flowing.
     
     'To mortal fields say farewell,
     Middleearth forsaking!
     In Elvenhome a clear bell
     in the high tower is shaking.
     Here grass fades and leaves fall,
     and sun and moon wither,
     and we have heard the far call
     that bids us journey thither',
     
     The oars were stayed. They turned aside:
     'Do you hear the call, Earthmaiden?
     Firiel! Firiel!' they cried.
     'Our ship is not fullladen.
     One more only we may bear.
     Come! For your days are speeding.
     Come! Earthmaiden elvenfair,
     our last call heeding.'
     
     Firiel looked from the riverbank,
     one step daring;
     then deep in clay her feet sank,
     and she halted staring.
     Slowly the elvenship went by
     whispering through the water:
     'I cannot come' they heard her cry.
     'I was born Earth's daughter!'
     
     No jewels bright her gown bore,
     as she walked back from the meadow
     under roof and dark door,
     under the houseshadow.
     She donned her smock of russet brown,
     her long hair braided,
     and to her work came stepping down.
     Soon the sunlight faded.
     
     Year still after year flows
     down the Seven Rivers;
     cloud passes, sunlight glows,
     reed and willow quivers
     at morn and eve, but never more
     westward ships have waded
     in mortal waters as before,
     and their song has faded.
     
     
     
  1 Lefnui, MorthondKirilRingl?, GilrainSernui,  and Anduin  .
  
  2 The name was borne by a princess of gondor, through whom aragorn claimed descent from the Southern line. It was also the name of a daughter of Elanor, daughter of Sam, but her name, if connected with the rhyme, must be derived from it; it could not have arisen in Westmarch.
  
  3 Grindwall  was a small hythe on the north bank of the Withywindle; it was outside the Hay, and was so well watched and protected by a grind  or fence extended into the water. Breredon  (Briar Hill) was a little village on rising ground behind the hythe, in the narrow tongue between the end of the High Hay and the Brandywine. At the Mithe  , the outflow of the Shirebourn, was a landingstage, from which a lane ran to Deephallow and so on to the Causeway road that went through Rushey and Stock.
  
  4 Indeed they probably gave him this name (it is bucklandish in form) to add to his many older ones.
  
     ---------------
     
     ------------------------------------------------------------
     
     ---------------
     
     ------------------------------------------------------------
     
